roeddaf yn King's Road, yn Llanda Beir NO 1932,
ym 15 ownig.
Gan ni fyny yn fater pornodau settledol
40 oaru yn usagell ton y affects y Pancaid.
Diolch.
Ac rydych yn mynnu fy modai i ddcheisio'r Techs wrth fy mheistedd?
I left school at 14 and then I was in a factory in Almondford for almost a year and then I left there because it was Pullman Springfield factory making the springs of bedding.
Well, they were all in coils and I was a feeder basically, they called it a feeder, just unpacking all the springs and presenting them to the ladies that crimped them up for the form of bedding.
So I left there and I was chased off with that, I wanted to become a motor mechanic so I went then to a garage in Llandebier called Morgan Jenkins and Sons to start my apprenticeship until I went into the army at 18 and my brother and I were called up at the same time.
My brother remained in the factory in Almondford and then he left later on and became, he passed his driving test and was a butter salesman for Harris the Butter Merchant in Llandebier.
They were friends with Ellis the Butter Merchant in Fairbach and I went to, after coming out of the army, I joined the RSE as a RSE patrol.
And then I, you've got me.
Yes, so a RSE patrol man.
Yes, my distance was from Llandefri all the way down to Morriston Cross and back twice a day basically.
I met up with an RSE patrol man in Llandefri, just outside Llandefri towards Brecon.
And after that then I, or later on, I worked for the steel company in Gorsaynend for a year and then I left that and then I became a bus driver then for six and a half years with South Wales Transport and Double Deckers and Single Deckers.
I was on coach driving as well towards Blackpool and Bournemouth and different places.
The elderly, I used to sing on the mic in the bus and the coach then and all the old age people used to enjoy it and they always used to ask for Dawn.
And the day the dentist and his wife on the front seat next to me on my left was, I didn't have to worry about my breathing because yesterday he had a big map on his lap and he said, left you had Dawn, right you had Dawn and all the way wherever I wanted to go.
He was a fantastic navigator.
What's the word? A navigator, yes.
And after that I went to, with the National Coal Board as a driver for five years later on and then I applied for a job as a foreman.
I didn't think I'd get it but out of 18 drivers tried it, the general manager gave it to me and I was told, we'll break you within three months and I was a foreman for ten years.
So I finished then after the closure of the pits and Mrs Thatcher came along and said bye bye to you all.
I lost £12,000 then on the, I lost £12,000 wages basically but never mind.
So after that then my mother was not very well and my parents and so between everything then I, between arthritis and other problems I had and then that was it and here I am now.
I stayed in the TA during that time.
Yes.
It was in 1950 when you and your twin brother got called up for National Service.
Well basically we were called up and did our training in Derring Lines in Brecon and during the career training and then we were doing some career training in Cwmgywdi at the mountain rescue places.
I think I'm not sure but and then we were on draft then for career or Belize in Central America and so we were all on the main square with all the streets and bedfords.
We were all in line picking different people up and my brother and I were by the tailboard of the lorry basically.
The other guys were getting up onto the vehicle and we were told that you're not going, you must report to the officers mess.
So we went up to the officers mess and that's where basically we stayed.
We became waiters and then.
What was the reason for you being called back?
The reason was that somebody had decided to send us up.
I don't know who it was but unknown to myself and my brother years.
I almost finished with the tears.
My mother told me that she had written to the then Major Tyler who was the PMCD.
It must have been prior to that.
Who she'd written to I don't know.
But to say that she'd already lost one by and I don't know her words as she didn't say.
I was just guessing that when you look at my eyes I don't know what it was.
I have no idea.
I didn't know anything of this.
I was quite annoyed really because I wanted to do a bit of adventure.
Everybody was worried about where to go here and in any case.
That's how we landed in Bracken itself.
When we came out we had to join the TAVR, Territorial Volunteer Reserves.
Army volunteers TAVR.
So that was 1952?
1952.
That was supposed to be for about six years or seven years.
During that time I stayed with Fourth Welsh until that was disbanded.
On the photograph I sent you this morning I won the driving competition.
On the LMG pairs with the Sergeant Bill, I can't think of his name.
He's the man in the centre behind to the right behind Colonel Tylai.
In that photograph you see of him he was the Colonel then.
During my time with the Fourth Welsh I was always Colonel's driver.
Because I was an advanced motorist and they must have thought I was better than anybody else.
I don't know.
Anyway I had the job.
As I think I told you the other day that I was in Talfblay Plain and this.
Ralph Tucker, Colonel Ralph Tucker, I was his driver.
He said I carry on along this.
What seemed to be like a big pudding in an area called Hangingstone Tor.
It was.
I said it's too much.
I said it's too soft.
We'll make it.
He said follow me Davis.
With that my Land Rover disappeared practically.
All I could do in the front end of the Land Rover was down in the mud.
I had an 18 foot aerial on the back.
I tried to hand-pitch it on that.
I had a couple of bars of Kit Kat chocolate.
After that Remy came to tow me out.
They got stuck by well towing me out.
I think it became a brigade exercise.
Anyway eventually from the Wednesday to the Friday I think I got back to one of the camps in Southbridge Bay.
Another little tale for you.
I was with Colonel Tyler.
Then he became a brigadier later on.
We were going across this web.
He said go straight across this field.
We drove straight across the field.
Then of course we'll say the Monday after or whatever it was.
He saw his mistake.
He was standing behind me and all the boys in front.
He said now this is what you must do.
He said go straight across the field like that.
He realised that somebody took the whole vehicle going across the field.
He said you don't cross fields like that.
You must go right round the edge and then your tracks won't be...
He was the one that was wrong.
He cleverly thought to clear this one up.
The camouflaging of all my vehicles.
To see if we had any mistakes at all.
We couldn't see any of our...
This was in RCT.
I couldn't see any mistakes at all that I had made with my boys.
The only thing we could see from the air was the officer's mess toilet with a Hessian right round it.
Sticking out like a sore thumb.
Later on of course that was shown as well.
I took a photograph of it.
When I was up in the air with this helicopter.
The officers were trying to not belittle us.
But see what mistakes we had made.
They were the ones that made the mistake.
Another little thing I used to do was stick into the toilet.
You had to dig six foot holes with the plank across.
You'd bump across the plank and do the rest of it.
One fell over, the plank broke.
They came out sinking over everything.
Then we were called up with 224 squadron.
I had a section of five or six vehicles.
I'll send you another photograph of one that we pulled in the side of the road.
Then I decided to go right across the road into this car parking area to change drivers.
At the start of it we were all collected together.
We had to drive to a place called Gage.
On the way down we must have left Carmarthen at about 7 o'clock in Cardiff.
That was more or less midnight.
I went to the sergeant's west end.
They wished me a happy birthday and gave me a glass of red wine.
That was it. Off we went.
I'd like it not to be known as Gage in Royal Air Force place.
We drove down into what was an underground arm and step over.
It was full of everything there.
There were rows and rows of ambulances, motorbikes and so forth.
We dropped the sides of the vehicles and loaded them up.
We started off down towards Marchwood in Southampton.
On the way down I stopped and had the vehicles in a formation of readiness to turn right into the car park.
All of a sudden we were shunted from behind by this big arctic vehicle.
There were three or four vehicles.
Bang, bang, bang.
I think three or four vehicles.
I think I showed you the photo.
I took those photographs while the boys were giving the police reports.
I went back to the lorry itself.
The little boy was in...
I know later on he had a broken leg.
I put him in my sleeping bag to give him a warm one and then off we went to the ambulance.
There was a helicopter above and other vehicles came and transferred the ammunition to other vehicles and off they went.
Then we went on to the emptying of the vehicles area.
I think it must have gone on to the Hermes or the Atlantic Coveya.
I think it was the Atlantic Coveya because the Hermes was in Plymouth.
I'm not sure.
On the way down, prior to leaving the depot, when we picked up the ammunition,
we wrote on it, from 2 to 4 Squadron, with love to the President,
love from 3 to 4 Squadron.
That little message, I don't think got there basically because it must have been sunk with the Atlantic Coveya.
We came back then and then I climbed Snowdon,
before that is climbed Snowdon with the boys 4 times.
Did I send you that photo?
No.
I sent you that one after. We were all on top of Snowdon, which was quite good.
Being silly rather than clever, we all ran down instead of...
I was a lot better than I am now. I couldn't do it now. I can't walk across the blanket road.
That's just where I live now.
I was on standby to pick up a rocket of some kind from Milford Avon,
and to take it up to Ross Scrythe in Scotland.
I was on standby and all this happened in about 12 days basically.
But the fault comes to an end then basically.
It was all stood down and we all attended with us.
While this vehicle that was commandeered, it was a civilian vehicle, a Volvo F10 it was.
I was supposed to have driven that one, and I think because there was a police car there as well,
I was hoping that he'd be in front because I wouldn't know the way to go up there.
And then he gets without maps and all that.
Don, are you a Welsh speaker by any chance?
No, my parents were English and we spoke English.
Another little story, my friend was a vet and he was in the German veterinary corps.
But he was stationed in... he had a practice in Llanfairfechon in North Wales.
He used to live in Llanfairfechon.
Did you?
I worked in Llanfairfechon in a hospital there I believe to not.
Well, well.
That was when I was young, I was only about 20 then.
You know, 21, 22.
Well, he had a practice in Llanfairfechon.
Going from the sea road adjacent to the centre of Llanfairfechon,
it was on the right, almost before you got to the wooded area on the left.
Right.
And anyway, we were in this... you say, did I speak Welsh?
And my friend was attending to a cow with a big glove on his right hand,
so you can guess the rest.
And the farmer said, do you speak Welsh?
And I said, no, but I can understand it.
He said, there's nothing clever about that.
He said, I've got a dog at home that can do that.
Is there anything else that you would like to add?
Any other stories or anything?
Have you seen the Days of Hope?
Yes.
Well...
That was with you, that was the First World War.
Yes, that's right.
That's right, yes, no, I have seen it.
Well, how that came about was all the boys were in the barracks in Cymraeddyn,
and this film crew turned up, and they wanted everybody...
They'd already been to 223 Scorton in Swansea,
and they came to us to ask for extras for the film.
So they said, some of you will have to get haircuts,
and I said, well, I don't mind having a haircut,
I said, because I haven't got much left in any case,
but I'm not shaving my moustache off.
And you see, as you are, we've got a job for you.
So they promoted me suddenly to a captain,
and all the officers proper, including our favourite sergeant major,
into private soldiers.
We're down in Pembroke, Lanyan Barracks in Pembroke Dock,
and I was dressed as an army officer, captain,
and the owner of the car was my driver in the picture,
and on the right hand side was, on my left hand side in the picture was two soldiers.
The nearest one to me was, then sergeant Westfold,
and the other gentleman was sergeant...
I can't think of his name just a second.
But anyway, the picture was, it looked as if I was just stepping into the car.
The car was a Swift, and it was owned by the chauffeur himself.
Somebody, he lives in Pembroke somewhere, I don't know.
And so that was the story of that.
And when I was fitting for the jacket,
the jacket had been worn by David Niven,
and the hat that I had was worn by Steptoe and son,
son, Harry H Colbert.
They had their names inside it.
I thought for the next wearer, I put my name on it as well.
My name was put forward to drive a Land Rover in the rally called Black Dragon.
During that time, my navigator was then Second Lieutenant David Morris,
and we started the rally in Abergavenny army depot there.
We had to drive up as far as Chester,
and come all the way back down then to Sunnybridge.
And then we had to, it was about 154 miles over distance,
but I won it outright.
There was, I think, about 135 Land Rovers trying.
It was previously won a couple of years before by the Royal Military Police.
Then it was the following year or two, it was won by the Gurkhas,
and then it was finally won by me.
And Lieutenant Morris was a good navigator.